.TH "ZSH-ABBR" 1 "September 23 2021" "abbr 4.6.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zsh\-abbr \- manage zsh abbreviations
.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBabbr\fR (\fBadd\fR | \fBa\fR) [\fIscope\fR] [\fI\-\-force\fR] <\fIabbreviation\fR> <\fIexpansion\fR>

\fBabbr\fR (\fBclear\-session\fR | \fBc\fR)

\fBabbr\fR (\fBerase\fR | \fBe\fR) [\fIscope\fR] <\fIabbreviation\fR>

\fBabbr\fR (\fBexpand\fR | \fBx\fR) <\fIabbreviation\fR>

\fBabbr\fR (\fBexport\-aliases\fR | \fB\-o\fR) <\fIscope\fI>

\fBabbr import\-aliases\fR [\fIscope\fR]

\fBabbr import\-fish\fR <\fIfile\fR>

\fBabbr import\-git\-aliases\fR

\fBabbr list\fR

\fBabbr (list\-abbreviations\fR | \fBl\fR)

\fBabbr\fR (\fBlist\-commands\fR | \fBL\fR)

\fBabbr\fR (\fBrename\fR | \fBR\fR) [\fIscope\fR] <\fIold_abbreviation\fR> <\fInew_abbreviation\fR>

\fBabbr load\fR

\fBabbr\fR (\fBhelp | \-\-help\fR | \fB\-h\fR)

\fBabbr\fR (\fBversion | \-\-version\fR | \fB\-v)

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBabbr\fR manages abbreviations \- user\-defined words that are replaced with longer phrases after they are entered.

For example, a frequently\-run command like git checkout can be abbreviated to gco. After entering gco and pressing [\fBSpace\fR], the full text git checkout will appear in the command line.

To prevent expansion, press [\fBCTRL\-SPACE\fR] in place of [\fBSPACE\fR].

\fBabbr-load\fR triggers a reload of the user abbreviations files. This also runs automatically before each of the above commands.

.SH Commands
The following commands are available:

.IP \(bu
\fBadd \fIabbreviation\fR \fIexpansion\fR or \fBa\fR \fIabbreviation\fR \fIexpansion\fR

Adds a new abbreviation, causing \fIabbreviation\fR to be expanded as \fIexpansion\fR.

Will error rather than overwrite an existing abbreviation.

Will warn if the abbreviation would replace an existing command. To add in spite of the warning, use [\fI\-\-force\fR].

May be multiple words. Quote or escape word delimiters.

.IP \(bu
\fBclear\-session\fR or \fBc\fR

Erases all session abbreviations.

.IP \(bu
\fBerase \fIabbreviation\fR or \fBe\fR \fIabbreviation\fR

Erases the abbreviation \fIabbreviation\fR .

.IP \(bu
\fBexpand \fIabbreviation\fR or \fBx \fIabbreviation\fR

Returns the \fIexpansion\fR of the abbreviation \fIabbreviation\fR.

.IP \(bu
\fBexport\-aliases\fR [<\fIdestination\fR>]

Exports a list of alias command for user abbreviations, suitable for pasting or piping to whereever you keep aliases.

.IP \(bu
\fBimport\-aliases\fR

Adds abbreviations for all aliases.

.IP \(bu
\fBimport\-fish\fR <\fIfile\fR>

Adds abbreviations exported from fish.

.IP \(bu
\fBimport\-git\-aliases\fR [\fI--file <config-file>\fR]

Adds two abbreviations for each git alias: a regular abbreviation, and a "g"-prefixed global abbreviation. Use `--file <config-file>` to use a config file instead of the one specified by GIT_CONFIG (see `man git-config`).

.IP \(bu
\fBabbr list\fR

Lists the available abbreviations without their expansions. Equivalent to fish's `abbr --list`.

.IP \(bu
\fBlist\-abbreviations\fR or \fBl\fR

Lists all abbreviations.

.IP \(bu
\fBlist\-commands\fR or \fBL\fR

Lists all abbreviations as commands suitable for export and import.

.IP \(bu
\fBrename\fR \fIold_abbreviation\fR \fInew_abbreviation\fR or \fBR\fR \fIold_abbreviation\fR \fInew_abbreviation\fR

Renames an abbreviation, from \fIold_abbreviation\fR to \fInew_abbreviation\fR.

.IP \(bu
\fBversion\fR or \fB\-\-version\fR or \fB\-v\fR

Show the current version.

.PP
All commands except for \fBclear-session\fR and \fBexpand\fR can take a \fBscope\fR:
.RS
.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-session\fR
or
\fB\-S\fR

Abbreviations available in the current session only.

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-user\fR or \fB\-U\fR

Abbreviations available to all current and future sessions.

.RE

All except for \fBclear-session\fR, \fBexpand\fR, \fBimport-fish\fR, and \fBimport-git-aliases\fR can take a \fBtype\fR:
.RS

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-global\fR or \fB\-g\fR

Abbreviation will expand anywhere on a line, rather than only in command (first word) position.

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-regular\fR or \fBr\fR (default)

Abbreviation will expand in command (first word) position only.

.RE

All except for \fBclear-session\fR, \fBexpand\fR, \fBexport-aliases\fR, \fBlist-abbreviations\fR, and \fBlist-commands\fR can be tried without making changes:
.RS

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR
Show whats the result of the command would be.

.RE

All except for \fBclear-session\fR, \fBexpand\fR, \fBexport-aliases\fR, \fBlist-abbreviations\fR, and \fBlist-commands\fR can be run with reduced output:
.RS

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-quiet\fR | \fB\-q\fR
Do not log success, warning, or error messages.

.IP \(bu
\fB\-\-quieter\fR | \fB\-qq\fR
Silence the warning that a newly-created abbreviation conflicts with a command name.

.SH Configuration
The following variables may be set:

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_AUTOLOAD\fR
Should `abbr load` run before every `abbr` command? (0 or 1, default 1)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_DEFAULT_BINDINGS\fR
Use the default key bindings? (0 or 1, default 1)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_DEBUG\fR
Print debugging logs? (0 or 1, default 0)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_DRY_RUN\fR
Behave as if `--dry-run` was passed? (0 or 1, default 0)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_FORCE\fR
Behave as if `--force` was passed? (0 or 1, default 0)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_QUIET\fR
Behave as if `--quiet` was passed? (0 or 1, default 0)

.IP \(bu
\fIABBR_USER_ABBREVIATIONS_FILE\fR
File abbreviations are stored in (default ${HOME}/.config/zsh/abbreviations)

.IP \(bu
\fINO_COLOR\fR
If `NO_COLOR` is set, color output is disabled. See https://no-color.org/.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
\fBabbr\fR gco="git checkout"

"gco" will be expanded as "git checkout" when it is the first word in the command, in all open and future sessions.

.TP
\fBabbr \-g\fR gco="git checkout"

"gco" will be replaced with "git checkout" anywhere on the line, in all open and future sessions.

.TP
\fBabbr \-g \-S\fR gco="git checkout"

"gco" will be replaced with "git checkout" anywhere on the line, in the current session.

.TP
\fBabbr e \-S \-g\fR gco;

Erase the global session abbreviation "gco". Note that because expansion is triggered by [\fBSPACE\fR] and [\fBENTER\fR], the semicolon (;) is necessary to prevent expansion when operating on global abbreviations.

.TP
\fBabbr e \-g\fR gco;

Erase the global user abbreviation "gco".

.TP
\fBabbr e\fR gco

Erase the regular user abbrevation "gco".

.TP
\fBabbr R \-g\fR gco gch

Rename an existing global user abbreviation from "gco" to "gch".

.SH HISTORY
Inspired by \fBfish\fR shell's \fBabbr\fR.

.SH AUTHORS

Henry Bley\-Vroman <olets@olets.dev>
